README.md, before:

# AI ToolKit MCP

[![CI](https://github.com/RavenMeld/AI-ToolKit-MCP/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/RavenMeld/AI-ToolKit-MCP/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/RavenMeld/AI-ToolKit-MCP)](https://github.com/RavenMeld/AI-ToolKit-MCP/releases/tag/v0.1.0)

AI ToolKit MCP is a Python MCP server that wraps an AI Toolkit training backend and exposes high-value training operations as MCP tools.

This repository is intentionally focused:
- `mcp_server.py` contains the MCP server and tool implementations.
- `mcp_http_server.py` provides a lightweight HTTP bridge over the same tool handlers.
- `tests/` contains contract and scoring/provenance tests.

## What You Get

- End-to-end training orchestration tools.
- Deep observability and run intelligence in one call.
- Dataset diagnostics and safe auto-improvement actions.
- Compare-run explainability with explicit provenance metadata.

## Release Status

- Current tag: `v0.1.1`
- Changelog: `CHANGELOG.md`
- CI: `.github/workflows/ci.yml`

## Quick Start (5 Minutes)

1. Install runtime dependencies:

```bash
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. Point the MCP server at your AI Toolkit backend:

```bash
export AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:8675
export LOG_LEVEL=INFO
```

3. Start the MCP server:

```bash
python mcp_server.py
```

4. Optional: start the HTTP bridge (health + tool execution endpoints):

```bash
python mcp_http_server.py --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

To require authentication on `POST /mcp/tool`:

```bash
export MCP_HTTP_AUTH_TOKEN=change-me
python mcp_http_server.py --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

Optional hardening knobs:

```bash
export MCP_HTTP_TOOL_TIMEOUT_SECONDS=120
export MCP_HTTP_MAX_BODY_BYTES=1048576
python mcp_http_server.py --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

5. Register this command in your MCP client and call `get-training-observability` with a `job_id`.

## Architecture At A Glance

1. MCP client calls a tool exposed by `mcp_server.py`.
2. The server queries AI Toolkit backend APIs for jobs, logs, metrics, and artifacts.
3. Helper layers score/aggregate speed, quality, errors, dataset, and NLP signals.
4. The server returns structured JSON contracts designed for automation, including confidence provenance fields.

## Most Used Workflows

### Validate -> Plan -> Guardrailed Run

Use these tools in order:
- `validate-training-config`
- `recommend-training-plan`
- `run-training-with-guardrails`

### One-Call Deep Diagnosis

Use:
- `get-training-observability`

Typical arguments:

```json
{
  "tool": "get-training-observability",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "lines": 1200,
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true,
    "include_evaluation": true,
    "include_next_experiment": true,
    "include_baseline_comparison": true,
    "baseline_limit": 5
  }
}
```

### Compare Multiple Runs

Use:
- `compare-training-runs`

Typical arguments:

```json
{
  "tool": "compare-training-runs",
  "arguments": {
    "job_ids": ["job_a", "job_b", "job_c"],
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true
  }
}
```

## Top 8 Tool Request/Response Examples

All requests below are JSON bodies suitable for `POST /mcp/tool`:
- `{"name":"<tool-name>","arguments":{...}}`

### 1) `get-training-observability`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "get-training-observability",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "lines": 1200,
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true,
    "include_evaluation": true,
    "include_next_experiment": true,
    "include_baseline_comparison": true,
    "baseline_limit": 5
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "get-training-observability",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"analysis_mode\": \"deep_log_intelligence\",\n  \"overall_health\": \"warning\",\n  \"intelligence\": {\"scores\": {\"overall\": 74.8}}\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 2) `compare-training-runs`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "compare-training-runs",
  "arguments": {
    "job_ids": ["job_a", "job_b", "job_c"],
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "compare-training-runs",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"compared_count\": 3,\n  \"ranking\": {\"winner_job_id\": \"job_b\"}\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 3) `run-training-with-guardrails`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "run-training-with-guardrails",
  "arguments": {
    "config_name": "my_lora_config",
    "monitor_seconds": 120,
    "stop_on_nan": true,
    "stop_on_repeated_oom": true,
    "stop_on_stalled_progress": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "run-training-with-guardrails",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"started\": true,\n  \"status\": \"monitor_window_complete\",\n  \"job_id\": \"job_12345\"\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 4) `evaluate-lora`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "evaluate-lora",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true,
    "pass_threshold": 70
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "evaluate-lora",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"overall_score\": 78.6,\n  \"grade\": \"B\",\n  \"passed\": true\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 5) `suggest-next-experiment`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "suggest-next-experiment",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "suggest-next-experiment",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"recommendation_type\": \"tune_learning_rate\",\n  \"proposed\": 0.00015,\n  \"risk_level\": \"low\"\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 6) `auto-improve-dataset`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "auto-improve-dataset",
  "arguments": {
    "dataset_path": "/ai-toolkit/datasets/my_dataset",
    "apply": false,
    "fill_missing_captions": true,
    "quarantine_corrupt": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "auto-improve-dataset",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"dataset_path\": \"/ai-toolkit/datasets/my_dataset\",\n  \"plan\": {\"missing_captions\": 18, \"corrupt_images\": 2}\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 7) `export-observability-report`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "export-observability-report",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "output_dir": "/ai-toolkit/outputs/reports",
    "filename_prefix": "job_12345_obsv",
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true,
    "include_evaluation": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "export-observability-report",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"success\": true,\n  \"json_path\": \"/ai-toolkit/outputs/reports/job_12345_obsv.json\",\n  \"markdown_path\": \"/ai-toolkit/outputs/reports/job_12345_obsv.md\"\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 8) `alert-routing`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "alert-routing",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "sink": "file",
    "destination": "/ai-toolkit/outputs/alerts/job_12345-alerts.jsonl",
    "min_severity": "warning",
    "include_context": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "alert-routing",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"routed_count\": 3,\n  \"suppressed_count\": 1,\n  \"destination\": \"/ai-toolkit/outputs/alerts/job_12345-alerts.jsonl\"\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Tool Surface

The server currently exposes these tools:

- `create-training-config`
- `validate-training-config`
- `recommend-training-plan`
- `run-training-with-guardrails`
- `watch-training-timeseries`
- `compare-training-runs`
- `evaluate-lora`
- `suggest-next-experiment`
- `auto-improve-dataset`
- `export-observability-report`
- `alert-routing`
- `list-configs`
- `get-config`
- `get-training-info`
- `upload-dataset`
- `list-datasets`
- `list-comfyui-models`
- `start-training`
- `get-training-status`
- `stop-training`
- `list-training-jobs`
- `export-model`
- `list-exported-models`
- `download-model`
- `get-system-stats`
- `get-training-observability`
- `get-training-logs`

## Key Contracts

Machine-readable schema files:
- `schemas/get-training-observability.schema.json`
- `schemas/compare-training-runs.schema.json`

### `get-training-observability`

Primary one-call intelligence endpoint. Output includes:
- speed, quality, error, dataset, and NLP analyses
- aggregate alerts
- optional evaluation and next-experiment recommendation
- optional baseline comparison
- intelligence section with decision gates and bottlenecks

Bottlenecks include confidence provenance:

```json
{
  "code": "THROUGHPUT_LOW",
  "severity": "warning",
  "message": "Observed throughput is below the adaptive healthy range for this run profile.",
  "confidence": 0.76,
  "confidence_source": "alert_category_max"
}
```

### `compare-training-runs`

Returns rank ordering plus explainability deltas against the winner.

`delta_to_winner.band_source` documents how confidence bands are derived:

```json
{
  "total": -6.4,
  "total_band": "moderate",
  "components": {
    "convergence": -8.0,
    "speed": -3.5,
    "stability": -4.2,
    "dataset": -1.0
  },
  "component_bands": {
    "convergence": "moderate",
    "speed": "moderate",
    "stability": "moderate",
    "dataset": "negligible"
  },
  "band_source": {
    "id": "absolute_delta_thresholds_v1",
    "units": "score_points",
    "thresholds": {
      "negligible_lte": 2.0,
      "moderate_lte": 8.0,
      "large_gt": 8.0
    }
  }
}
```

### Output Schema Excerpts

`intelligence`:

```json
{
  "scores": {
    "overall": 0.0,
    "convergence": 0.0,
    "stability": 0.0,
    "speed": 0.0,
    "dataset": 0.0
  },
  "bottlenecks": [
    {
      "code": "THROUGHPUT_LOW",
      "severity": "warning",
      "message": "Observed throughput is below the adaptive healthy range for this run profile.",
      "confidence": 0.76,
      "confidence_source": "alert_category_max"
    }
  ],
  "recommendations": [
    {
      "title": "Reduce learning rate and rerun 300 steps",
      "priority": "high"
    }
  ],
  "decision_gates": {
    "ready_for_release": false
  },
  "thresholds": {
    "pass_threshold": 70.0
  },
  "context": {
    "run_class": "standard",
    "speed_curve_thresholds": {
      "excellent": 0.35,
      "good": 0.2,
      "fair": 0.1,
      "watch": 0.05,
      "poor": 0.02
    }
  },
  "confidence": {
    "overall": 0.0
  }
}
```

`delta_to_winner`:

```json
{
  "total": -6.4,
  "total_band": "moderate",
  "components": {
    "convergence": -8.0,
    "speed": -3.5,
    "stability": -4.2,
    "dataset": -1.0
  },
  "component_bands": {
    "convergence": "moderate",
    "speed": "moderate",
    "stability": "moderate",
    "dataset": "negligible"
  },
  "band_source": {
    "id": "absolute_delta_thresholds_v1",
    "units": "score_points",
    "thresholds": {
      "negligible_lte": 2.0,
      "moderate_lte": 8.0,
      "large_gt": 8.0
    }
  }
}
```

`alerts`:

```json
[
  {
    "severity": "warning",
    "category": "speed",
    "message": "Training throughput is low.",
    "confidence": 0.76
  },
  {
    "severity": "critical",
    "category": "errors",
    "message": "Critical error pattern detected in logs.",
    "confidence": 0.95
  }
]
```

## Runtime Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- A reachable AI Toolkit server (`AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL`)
- Valid filesystem mounts for dataset/output/config paths expected by the backend

Install pinned dependencies:

```bash
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Configuration

Environment variables used by the server:

- `AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL` (default: `http://localhost:8675`)
- `LOG_LEVEL` (default: `INFO`)
- `COMFYUI_MODEL_ROOTS` (colon-separated model roots)
- `MCP_HTTP_AUTH_TOKEN` (optional auth token for `/mcp/tool`)
- `MCP_HTTP_TOOL_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` (default: `120`)
- `MCP_HTTP_MAX_BODY_BYTES` (default: `1048576` / `1MB`)

Default data paths in code:
- `/ai-toolkit/datasets`
- `/ai-toolkit/outputs`
- `/ai-toolkit/configs`
- `/workspace/logs`

## Run The MCP Server

```bash
python mcp_server.py
```

The process starts an MCP stdio server (`server_name=ai-toolkit-mcp`).

## Run The HTTP Bridge

```bash
python mcp_http_server.py --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

CLI flags:
- `--auth-token`
- `--tool-timeout-seconds`
- `--max-body-bytes`

Endpoints:
- `GET /health`
- `GET /tools`
- `POST /mcp/tool` with body: `{"name":"<tool-name>","arguments":{...}}`

Auth for `POST /mcp/tool` when `MCP_HTTP_AUTH_TOKEN` is configured:
- `Authorization: Bearer <token>`
- or `X-API-Key: <token>`

Hardening error codes:
- `TOOL_TIMEOUT` (`504`) when execution exceeds `MCP_HTTP_TOOL_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`
- `PAYLOAD_TOO_LARGE` (`413`) when body exceeds `MCP_HTTP_MAX_BODY_BYTES`

Normalized response envelope:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "request_id": "1f106cc8-a8dc-4057-94a2-6fd91d9f0e16",
  "tool": "list-configs",
  "data": {
    "status": "ok"
  },
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\"status\":\"ok\"}"
    }
  ]
}
```

## MCP Client Wiring (Example)

Example MCP command configuration:

```json
{
  "command": "python",
  "args": ["/absolute/path/to/mcp_server.py"],
  "env": {
    "AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL": "http://localhost:8675",
    "LOG_LEVEL": "INFO"
  }
}
```

## Development and Validation

Run tests:

```bash
python -m unittest discover -s tests -p 'test_*.py'
```

Current test modules:
- `tests/test_timeseries_compare_helpers.py`
- `tests/test_observability_schema_contract.py`
- `tests/test_http_wrapper_basic.py`
- `tests/test_get_training_observability_smoke.py`
- `tests/test_output_schema_files.py`

Optional syntax check:

```bash
python -m py_compile mcp_server.py mcp_http_server.py
```

## Repository Layout

- `mcp_server.py`: MCP server, tool schemas, tool handlers, intelligence/scoring helpers
- `mcp_http_server.py`: minimal HTTP wrapper delegating to the same MCP tool handlers
- `schemas/`: versioned JSON schema contracts for high-value tool outputs
- `tests/`: contract and helper tests

## Contract Stability Notes

- `confidence_source` and `band_source` are part of the intended automation contract.
- `band_source.id` is versioned (`absolute_delta_thresholds_v1`) so downstream systems can detect scoring-method changes.
- Threshold values in `band_source.thresholds` should be consumed dynamically instead of hardcoded.
- Formal compatibility rules are documented in `docs/compatibility.md`.
- CI includes an explicit schema contract check (`tests/test_output_schema_files.py`) before full unit tests.

## Operational Guardrails

- Run through `run-training-with-guardrails` for long jobs instead of raw `start-training`.
- Prefer `include_baseline_comparison=true` for release/selection decisions.
- Route critical conditions using `alert-routing` to file or webhook sinks.
- Keep `AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL` on trusted internal networks only.

## Troubleshooting

- `Permission denied` / backend errors:
  - Verify `AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL` points to a live AI Toolkit instance.
- Missing dataset/report artifacts:
  - Ensure backend-mounted paths exist and are writable where required.
- No models found in `list-comfyui-models`:
  - Verify `COMFYUI_MODEL_ROOTS` and filesystem mounts.

## Notes

- This repo is the MCP server layer. It assumes AI Toolkit backend APIs are available and healthy.
- Provenance fields are intentional API contracts for automation consumers (`confidence_source`, `band_source`).

Commit message:

feat(http): normalize framework errors and echo request IDs

README.md, after:

# AI ToolKit MCP

[![CI](https://github.com/RavenMeld/AI-ToolKit-MCP/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/RavenMeld/AI-ToolKit-MCP/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/RavenMeld/AI-ToolKit-MCP)](https://github.com/RavenMeld/AI-ToolKit-MCP/releases/tag/v0.1.0)

AI ToolKit MCP is a Python MCP server that wraps an AI Toolkit training backend and exposes high-value training operations as MCP tools.

This repository is intentionally focused:
- `mcp_server.py` contains the MCP server and tool implementations.
- `mcp_http_server.py` provides a lightweight HTTP bridge over the same tool handlers.
- `tests/` contains contract and scoring/provenance tests.

## What You Get

- End-to-end training orchestration tools.
- Deep observability and run intelligence in one call.
- Dataset diagnostics and safe auto-improvement actions.
- Compare-run explainability with explicit provenance metadata.

## Release Status

- Current tag: `v0.1.1`
- Changelog: `CHANGELOG.md`
- CI: `.github/workflows/ci.yml`

## Quick Start (5 Minutes)

1. Install runtime dependencies:

```bash
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. Point the MCP server at your AI Toolkit backend:

```bash
export AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:8675
export LOG_LEVEL=INFO
```

3. Start the MCP server:

```bash
python mcp_server.py
```

4. Optional: start the HTTP bridge (health + tool execution endpoints):

```bash
python mcp_http_server.py --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

To require authentication on `POST /mcp/tool`:

```bash
export MCP_HTTP_AUTH_TOKEN=change-me
python mcp_http_server.py --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

Optional hardening knobs:

```bash
export MCP_HTTP_TOOL_TIMEOUT_SECONDS=120
export MCP_HTTP_MAX_BODY_BYTES=1048576
python mcp_http_server.py --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

5. Register this command in your MCP client and call `get-training-observability` with a `job_id`.

## Architecture At A Glance

1. MCP client calls a tool exposed by `mcp_server.py`.
2. The server queries AI Toolkit backend APIs for jobs, logs, metrics, and artifacts.
3. Helper layers score/aggregate speed, quality, errors, dataset, and NLP signals.
4. The server returns structured JSON contracts designed for automation, including confidence provenance fields.

## Most Used Workflows

### Validate -> Plan -> Guardrailed Run

Use these tools in order:
- `validate-training-config`
- `recommend-training-plan`
- `run-training-with-guardrails`

### One-Call Deep Diagnosis

Use:
- `get-training-observability`

Typical arguments:

```json
{
  "tool": "get-training-observability",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "lines": 1200,
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true,
    "include_evaluation": true,
    "include_next_experiment": true,
    "include_baseline_comparison": true,
    "baseline_limit": 5
  }
}
```

### Compare Multiple Runs

Use:
- `compare-training-runs`

Typical arguments:

```json
{
  "tool": "compare-training-runs",
  "arguments": {
    "job_ids": ["job_a", "job_b", "job_c"],
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true
  }
}
```

## Top 8 Tool Request/Response Examples

All requests below are JSON bodies suitable for `POST /mcp/tool`:
- `{"name":"<tool-name>","arguments":{...}}`

### 1) `get-training-observability`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "get-training-observability",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "lines": 1200,
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true,
    "include_evaluation": true,
    "include_next_experiment": true,
    "include_baseline_comparison": true,
    "baseline_limit": 5
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "get-training-observability",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"analysis_mode\": \"deep_log_intelligence\",\n  \"overall_health\": \"warning\",\n  \"intelligence\": {\"scores\": {\"overall\": 74.8}}\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 2) `compare-training-runs`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "compare-training-runs",
  "arguments": {
    "job_ids": ["job_a", "job_b", "job_c"],
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "compare-training-runs",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"compared_count\": 3,\n  \"ranking\": {\"winner_job_id\": \"job_b\"}\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 3) `run-training-with-guardrails`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "run-training-with-guardrails",
  "arguments": {
    "config_name": "my_lora_config",
    "monitor_seconds": 120,
    "stop_on_nan": true,
    "stop_on_repeated_oom": true,
    "stop_on_stalled_progress": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "run-training-with-guardrails",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"started\": true,\n  \"status\": \"monitor_window_complete\",\n  \"job_id\": \"job_12345\"\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 4) `evaluate-lora`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "evaluate-lora",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true,
    "pass_threshold": 70
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "evaluate-lora",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"overall_score\": 78.6,\n  \"grade\": \"B\",\n  \"passed\": true\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 5) `suggest-next-experiment`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "suggest-next-experiment",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "suggest-next-experiment",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"recommendation_type\": \"tune_learning_rate\",\n  \"proposed\": 0.00015,\n  \"risk_level\": \"low\"\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 6) `auto-improve-dataset`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "auto-improve-dataset",
  "arguments": {
    "dataset_path": "/ai-toolkit/datasets/my_dataset",
    "apply": false,
    "fill_missing_captions": true,
    "quarantine_corrupt": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "auto-improve-dataset",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"dataset_path\": \"/ai-toolkit/datasets/my_dataset\",\n  \"plan\": {\"missing_captions\": 18, \"corrupt_images\": 2}\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 7) `export-observability-report`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "export-observability-report",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "output_dir": "/ai-toolkit/outputs/reports",
    "filename_prefix": "job_12345_obsv",
    "include_dataset": true,
    "include_nlp": true,
    "include_evaluation": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "export-observability-report",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"success\": true,\n  \"json_path\": \"/ai-toolkit/outputs/reports/job_12345_obsv.json\",\n  \"markdown_path\": \"/ai-toolkit/outputs/reports/job_12345_obsv.md\"\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

### 8) `alert-routing`

Request:

```json
{
  "name": "alert-routing",
  "arguments": {
    "job_id": "job_12345",
    "sink": "file",
    "destination": "/ai-toolkit/outputs/alerts/job_12345-alerts.jsonl",
    "min_severity": "warning",
    "include_context": true
  }
}
```

Response excerpt:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "tool": "alert-routing",
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\n  \"routed_count\": 3,\n  \"suppressed_count\": 1,\n  \"destination\": \"/ai-toolkit/outputs/alerts/job_12345-alerts.jsonl\"\n}"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Tool Surface

The server currently exposes these tools:

- `create-training-config`
- `validate-training-config`
- `recommend-training-plan`
- `run-training-with-guardrails`
- `watch-training-timeseries`
- `compare-training-runs`
- `evaluate-lora`
- `suggest-next-experiment`
- `auto-improve-dataset`
- `export-observability-report`
- `alert-routing`
- `list-configs`
- `get-config`
- `get-training-info`
- `upload-dataset`
- `list-datasets`
- `list-comfyui-models`
- `start-training`
- `get-training-status`
- `stop-training`
- `list-training-jobs`
- `export-model`
- `list-exported-models`
- `download-model`
- `get-system-stats`
- `get-training-observability`
- `get-training-logs`

## Key Contracts

Machine-readable schema files:
- `schemas/get-training-observability.schema.json`
- `schemas/compare-training-runs.schema.json`

### `get-training-observability`

Primary one-call intelligence endpoint. Output includes:
- speed, quality, error, dataset, and NLP analyses
- aggregate alerts
- optional evaluation and next-experiment recommendation
- optional baseline comparison
- intelligence section with decision gates and bottlenecks

Bottlenecks include confidence provenance:

```json
{
  "code": "THROUGHPUT_LOW",
  "severity": "warning",
  "message": "Observed throughput is below the adaptive healthy range for this run profile.",
  "confidence": 0.76,
  "confidence_source": "alert_category_max"
}
```

### `compare-training-runs`

Returns rank ordering plus explainability deltas against the winner.

`delta_to_winner.band_source` documents how confidence bands are derived:

```json
{
  "total": -6.4,
  "total_band": "moderate",
  "components": {
    "convergence": -8.0,
    "speed": -3.5,
    "stability": -4.2,
    "dataset": -1.0
  },
  "component_bands": {
    "convergence": "moderate",
    "speed": "moderate",
    "stability": "moderate",
    "dataset": "negligible"
  },
  "band_source": {
    "id": "absolute_delta_thresholds_v1",
    "units": "score_points",
    "thresholds": {
      "negligible_lte": 2.0,
      "moderate_lte": 8.0,
      "large_gt": 8.0
    }
  }
}
```

### Output Schema Excerpts

`intelligence`:

```json
{
  "scores": {
    "overall": 0.0,
    "convergence": 0.0,
    "stability": 0.0,
    "speed": 0.0,
    "dataset": 0.0
  },
  "bottlenecks": [
    {
      "code": "THROUGHPUT_LOW",
      "severity": "warning",
      "message": "Observed throughput is below the adaptive healthy range for this run profile.",
      "confidence": 0.76,
      "confidence_source": "alert_category_max"
    }
  ],
  "recommendations": [
    {
      "title": "Reduce learning rate and rerun 300 steps",
      "priority": "high"
    }
  ],
  "decision_gates": {
    "ready_for_release": false
  },
  "thresholds": {
    "pass_threshold": 70.0
  },
  "context": {
    "run_class": "standard",
    "speed_curve_thresholds": {
      "excellent": 0.35,
      "good": 0.2,
      "fair": 0.1,
      "watch": 0.05,
      "poor": 0.02
    }
  },
  "confidence": {
    "overall": 0.0
  }
}
```

`delta_to_winner`:

```json
{
  "total": -6.4,
  "total_band": "moderate",
  "components": {
    "convergence": -8.0,
    "speed": -3.5,
    "stability": -4.2,
    "dataset": -1.0
  },
  "component_bands": {
    "convergence": "moderate",
    "speed": "moderate",
    "stability": "moderate",
    "dataset": "negligible"
  },
  "band_source": {
    "id": "absolute_delta_thresholds_v1",
    "units": "score_points",
    "thresholds": {
      "negligible_lte": 2.0,
      "moderate_lte": 8.0,
      "large_gt": 8.0
    }
  }
}
```

`alerts`:

```json
[
  {
    "severity": "warning",
    "category": "speed",
    "message": "Training throughput is low.",
    "confidence": 0.76
  },
  {
    "severity": "critical",
    "category": "errors",
    "message": "Critical error pattern detected in logs.",
    "confidence": 0.95
  }
]
```

## Runtime Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- A reachable AI Toolkit server (`AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL`)
- Valid filesystem mounts for dataset/output/config paths expected by the backend

Install pinned dependencies:

```bash
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Configuration

Environment variables used by the server:

- `AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL` (default: `http://localhost:8675`)
- `LOG_LEVEL` (default: `INFO`)
- `COMFYUI_MODEL_ROOTS` (colon-separated model roots)
- `MCP_HTTP_AUTH_TOKEN` (optional auth token for `/mcp/tool`)
- `MCP_HTTP_TOOL_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` (default: `120`)
- `MCP_HTTP_MAX_BODY_BYTES` (default: `1048576` / `1MB`)

Default data paths in code:
- `/ai-toolkit/datasets`
- `/ai-toolkit/outputs`
- `/ai-toolkit/configs`
- `/workspace/logs`

## Run The MCP Server

```bash
python mcp_server.py
```

The process starts an MCP stdio server (`server_name=ai-toolkit-mcp`).

## Run The HTTP Bridge

```bash
python mcp_http_server.py --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

CLI flags:
- `--auth-token`
- `--tool-timeout-seconds`
- `--max-body-bytes`

Endpoints:
- `GET /health`
- `GET /tools`
- `POST /mcp/tool` with body: `{"name":"<tool-name>","arguments":{...}}`

Auth for `POST /mcp/tool` when `MCP_HTTP_AUTH_TOKEN` is configured:
- `Authorization: Bearer <token>`
- or `X-API-Key: <token>`

Hardening error codes:
- `INVALID_JSON` (`400`) when request body is not valid JSON
- `TOOL_TIMEOUT` (`504`) when execution exceeds `MCP_HTTP_TOOL_TIMEOUT_SECONDS`
- `PAYLOAD_TOO_LARGE` (`413`) when body exceeds `MCP_HTTP_MAX_BODY_BYTES`
- `HTTP_<status>` for framework-level HTTP errors (for example `HTTP_404`)

Request correlation:
- Send `X-Request-ID` in request headers to preserve your own request ID.
- Responses include the same `X-Request-ID` header and `request_id` JSON field.

Normalized response envelope:

```json
{
  "ok": true,
  "request_id": "1f106cc8-a8dc-4057-94a2-6fd91d9f0e16",
  "tool": "list-configs",
  "data": {
    "status": "ok"
  },
  "result": [
    {
      "type": "text",
      "text": "{\"status\":\"ok\"}"
    }
  ]
}
```

## MCP Client Wiring (Example)

Example MCP command configuration:

```json
{
  "command": "python",
  "args": ["/absolute/path/to/mcp_server.py"],
  "env": {
    "AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL": "http://localhost:8675",
    "LOG_LEVEL": "INFO"
  }
}
```

## Development and Validation

Run tests:

```bash
python -m unittest discover -s tests -p 'test_*.py'
```

Current test modules:
- `tests/test_timeseries_compare_helpers.py`
- `tests/test_observability_schema_contract.py`
- `tests/test_http_wrapper_basic.py`
- `tests/test_get_training_observability_smoke.py`
- `tests/test_output_schema_files.py`

Optional syntax check:

```bash
python -m py_compile mcp_server.py mcp_http_server.py
```

## Repository Layout

- `mcp_server.py`: MCP server, tool schemas, tool handlers, intelligence/scoring helpers
- `mcp_http_server.py`: minimal HTTP wrapper delegating to the same MCP tool handlers
- `schemas/`: versioned JSON schema contracts for high-value tool outputs
- `tests/`: contract and helper tests

## Contract Stability Notes

- `confidence_source` and `band_source` are part of the intended automation contract.
- `band_source.id` is versioned (`absolute_delta_thresholds_v1`) so downstream systems can detect scoring-method changes.
- Threshold values in `band_source.thresholds` should be consumed dynamically instead of hardcoded.
- Formal compatibility rules are documented in `docs/compatibility.md`.
- CI includes an explicit schema contract check (`tests/test_output_schema_files.py`) before full unit tests.

## Operational Guardrails

- Run through `run-training-with-guardrails` for long jobs instead of raw `start-training`.
- Prefer `include_baseline_comparison=true` for release/selection decisions.
- Route critical conditions using `alert-routing` to file or webhook sinks.
- Keep `AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL` on trusted internal networks only.

## Troubleshooting

- `Permission denied` / backend errors:
  - Verify `AI_TOOLKIT_SERVER_URL` points to a live AI Toolkit instance.
- Missing dataset/report artifacts:
  - Ensure backend-mounted paths exist and are writable where required.
- No models found in `list-comfyui-models`:
  - Verify `COMFYUI_MODEL_ROOTS` and filesystem mounts.

## Notes

- This repo is the MCP server layer. It assumes AI Toolkit backend APIs are available and healthy.
- Provenance fields are intentional API contracts for automation consumers (`confidence_source`, `band_source`).
